Which of the following diagnostic conclusions best corresponds to the person described in the vignette at the present time? (Scroll down to review the diagnostic guidelines and to move on to the next page.)
You indicated that a diagnosis from a different area best corresponds to the person described in the vignette.  Which diagnosis?
Why do you feel that this is the most appropriate diagnosis?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q1 Generalized Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 1. Is there evidence of marked symptoms of anxiety that are accompanied

by one or more of the following?



(a) general apprehensiveness that is not restricted to any particular

environmental circumstance (i.e., “free-floating anxiety”).

(b) worry (apprehensive expectation) about untoward events occurring in

several different aspects of everyday life (e.g., work, finances, health, family).
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q1 Generalized Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 2. Is there evidence that the anxiety and general apprehensiveness or worry are accompanied by additional symptoms, such as:

 

(a) Muscle tension or motor restlessness.

(b) Sympathetic autonomic overactivity as evidenced by frequent

gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea and/or abdominal distress, heart

palpitations, sweating, trembling, shaking, and/or dry mouth.

(c) Subjective experience of nervousness, restlessness, or being “on edge”.

(d) Difficulties maintaining concentration.

(e) Irritability.

(f) Sleep disturbances (difficulty falling or staying asleep, or restless,

unsatisfying sleep).
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q1 Generalized Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 3. Have the symptoms been present for at least several months, for more days than not?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q1 Generalized Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 4. Are the symptoms sufficiently severe to result in significant distress about experiencing persistent anxiety symptoms or to result in significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational, or other important areas of functioning?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q1 Generalized Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 5. Do the symptoms represent a normal or appropriate reaction to stress or environmental circumstances? If so, a diagnosis of Generalized Anxiety Disorder is not appropriate. A diagnosis of Adjustment Disorder may be appropriate if the symptoms represent a maladaptive reaction to an identifiable psychosocial stressor or multiple stressors characterized by preoccupation with the stressor or its consequences. Individuals with Adjustment disorder typically have normal functioning prior to the onset of the stressor(s), and symptoms generally resolve within 6 months.
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q3 Agoraphobia for the person described in the vignette above. - 1. Is there evidence of marked and excessive fear or anxiety that occurs in, or in anticipation of, multiple situations where escape might be difficult or help might not be available, such as using public transportation, being in crowds, being outside the home alone, in shops, theatres, or standing in line?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q3 Agoraphobia for the person described in the vignette above. - 2. Is the individual consistently fearful or anxious about these situations due to a sense of danger or fear of specific negative outcomes such as panic attacks, symptoms of panic, or other incapacitating (e.g., falling) or embarrassing physical symptoms (e.g., incontinence)?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q3 Agoraphobia for the person described in the vignette above. - 3. Are these situations actively avoided, entered only under specific circumstances (e.g., in the presence of a companion), or else endured with intense fear or anxiety?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q3 Agoraphobia for the person described in the vignette above. - 4. Have the symptoms persisted for an extended period of time (e.g., at least several months)?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q3 Agoraphobia for the person described in the vignette above. - 5. Are the symptoms sufficiently severe to result in significant distress about experiencing persistent anxiety symptoms or significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational, or other important areas of functioning?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q3 Agoraphobia for the person described in the vignette above. - 6. Are the symptoms and behaviours transient, or do they occur as a normal part of development, or are they limited to periods of increased stress?  If so, a diagnosis of Agoraphobia is not appropriate.
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q4 Specific Phobia for the person described in the vignette above. - 1. Is there evidence of marked and excessive fear or anxiety that consistently occurs when exposed to one or more specific objects or situations (e.g., proximity to certain kinds of animals, heights, closed spaces, sight of blood or injury) and that is out of proportion to the actual danger posed by the specific object or situation?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q4 Specific Phobia for the person described in the vignette above. - 2. Is the phobic object or situation actively avoided or else endured with intense fear or anxiety?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q4 Specific Phobia for the person described in the vignette above. - 3. Has the pattern of fear, anxiety, or avoidance related to specific objects or situations persisted for an extended period of time (e.g., at least several months)?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q4 Specific Phobia for the person described in the vignette above. - 4. Are the symptoms sufficiently severe to result in significant distress about experiencing persistent anxiety symptoms or significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational, or other important areas of functioning?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q4 Specific Phobia for the person described in the vignette above. - 5. Do the symptoms occur as a normal part of development, or is the degree of fear or anxiety comparable to that of other individuals at a similar developmental level? In children and adolescents, some fears may be part of normal development (e.g., a young child who is afraid of dogs). Specific Phobia should only be diagnosed if the fear or anxiety is excessive in comparison to that of individuals at a similar developmental level.
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q5 Social Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 1. Is there evidence of marked and excessive fear or anxiety that occurs consistently in one or more social situations such as social interactions (e.g., having a conversation), being observed (e.g., while eating or drinking), or performing in front of others (e.g., giving a speech)?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q5 Social Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 2. Is the person concerned that he or she will act in a way, or show anxiety symptoms, that will be negatively evaluated by others (i.e., be humiliating, embarrassing, lead to rejection, or be offensive)?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q5 Social Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 3. Are the relevant social situations consistently avoided or endured with intense fear or anxiety?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q5 Social Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 4. Have the symptoms persisted for an extended period of time (e.g., at least several months)?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q5 Social Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 5. Are the symptoms sufficiently severe to result in significant distress about experiencing persistent anxiety symptoms or to result in significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational, or other important areas of functioning?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q5 Social Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 6. Do the symptoms occur as a part of normal development (e.g., a child’s reluctance to interact with unfamiliar people in novel situations)?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q5 Social Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 7. Are the symptoms clearly in excess of what is normative for the specific cultural context?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q5 Social Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 8. Is the disorder better characterized by another mental or behavioural disorder? For example, in Generalized Anxiety Disorder, the main focus is worry about negative consequences that can occur in multiple everyday situations (e.g., work, relationships, finances) rather than being restricted to concerns about one’s behaviour or appearance being negatively evaluated in social situations.
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q6 Separation Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 1. Is there evidence of marked and excessive fear or anxiety about separation from those individuals to whom the person is attached (i.e., has a deep affective bond with)? Manifestations of fear or anxiety related to separation depend on the individual’s developmental level, but may include:

(a) Persistent thoughts that harm or some other untoward event (e.g., being kidnapped) will lead to separation

(b) Reluctance or refusal to go to school or work.

(c) Recurrent excessive distress (e.g., tantrums, social withdrawal) related to being separated from the attachment figure.

(d) Reluctance or refusal to go to sleep without being near the attachment figure.

(e) Recurrent nightmares about separation.

(f) Physical symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, stomachache, headache, on occasions that involve separation from the attachment figure, such as leaving home to go t
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q6 Separation Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 2. Have the symptoms persisted for an extended period of time (e.g., at least several months)?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q6 Separation Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 3. Are the symptoms sufficiently severe to result in significant distress about experiencing persistent anxiety symptoms or significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational, or other important areas of functioning?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q6 Separation Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 4. Are the symptoms in response to situations that are associated with other stressors or are normal sources of anxiety (e.g., leaving home to start a job or attend university in a new city)? Separation Anxiety Disorder is differentiated based on the focus of the anxiety being on separation from a key attachment figure rather than on other aspects of adjusting to novel circumstances.
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q6 Separation Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 5. Are the symptoms developmentally appropriate?  For example, strong attachment to loved ones is a normal and healthy part of life and separation from these individuals may be associated with transient sadness or anxiety. Preschool children may show a moderate or even greater degree of anxiety over real or threatened separation from people to whom they are attached.
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q6 Separation Anxiety Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 6. Is the disorder better characterized by another mental or behavioural disorder? For example, individuals Generalized Anxiety Disorder experience chronic and excessive worry about a variety of everyday life events that can include preoccupation about the safety of key attachment figures, but also generally experience without additional worries regarding other domains of everyday life.
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q2 Panic Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 1. Is there evidence of recurrent unexpected panic attacks that are not restricted to particular stimuli or situations, which are characterized by discrete episodes of intense fear or apprehension and the rapid and concurrent onset of characteristic symptoms? These symptoms may include but are not limited, to:



(a) Palpitations or increased heart rate

(b) Sweating

(c) Trembling

(d) Sensations of shortness of breath

(e) Feelings of choking

(f) Chest pain

(g) Nausea or abdominal distress

(h) Feelings of dizziness or lightheadedness

(i) Chills or hot flushes

(j) Tingling or lack of sensation in extremities (i.e., paresthesias)

(k) Depersonalization or derealization

(l) Fear of losing control or going mad

(m) Fear of imminent death
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q2 Panic Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 2. Is there evidence of persistent concern or worry (e.g., for several weeks) about the recurrence of panic attacks or their perceived negative significance (e.g., that the physiological symptoms may be those of a myocardial infarction), or of behaviours intended to avoid their recurrence (e.g., only leaving the home with a trusted companion)?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q2 Panic Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 3. Are the symptoms sufficiently severe to result in significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational, or other important areas of functioning?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q2 Panic Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 4. Do the panic attacks occur in the context of another Anxiety and Fear-Related Disorder as a part of an intense anxiety response to a distressing stimulus that represents a focus of apprehension in that disorder (e.g., a particular object or situation in Specific Phobia, negative social evaluation in Social Anxiety Disorder)?  If panic attacks are limited to such situations in the context of another disorder, a separate diagnosis of Panic Disorder is not warranted.
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q2 Panic Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 5. Can the symptoms be differentiated from normal situation-bound anxiety that may be experienced in everyday life (e.g., during stressful life transitions such as moving to a new city)? Panic Disorder is differentiated from normal fear reactions by frequent recurrence of panic attacks, persistent alteration in behaviour following panic attacks (e.g., avoidance), and associated significant impairment in functioning.
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q2 Panic Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 6. Is the disorder better characterized by another mental or behavioural disorder? Panic attacks can occur in other Anxiety and Fear-Related Disorders as well as other Mental and Behavioural Disorders and therefore are not in and of themselves indicative of Panic Disorder.
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q7 Selective Mutism for the person described in the vignette above. - 1. Is there evidence of consistent selectivity in speaking, such that a child demonstrates adequate language competence in specific social situations, typically at home, but consistently fails to speak in others, typically at school?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q7 Selective Mutism for the person described in the vignette above. - 2. Is the duration of the disturbance at least one month, and not limited to the first month of school?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q7 Selective Mutism for the person described in the vignette above. - 3. Is the disturbance due to a lack of knowledge of, or comfort with, the spoken language demanded in the social situation? If so, a diagnosis of Selective Mutism is not appropriate.
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q7 Selective Mutism for the person described in the vignette above. - 4. Is the selectivity of speech sufficiently severe so as to interfere with educational achievement or with social communication, or associated with significant impairment in other important areas of functioning?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q7 Selective Mutism for the person described in the vignette above. - 5. Are the symptoms normal or appropriate responses to environmental circumstances? For example, immigrant children or children from linguistic minorities who are unfamiliar with or uncomfortable in the official language of their new host country may, for a discrete period of time, refuse to speak to strangers in their new environment and should not be diagnosed with Selective Mutism should not be diagnosed in such cases.
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q7 Selective Mutism for the person described in the vignette above. - 6. Is the disorder better characterized by another mental or behavioural disorder? For example, Selective Mutism is characterized by a failure to speak in specific situations whereas in Social Anxiety Disorder fear and anxiety result in avoidance of multiple social contexts.
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q8 Other Anxiety and Fear-Related Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 1. Does the clinical presentation satisfy the definitional requirements of any other disorder in the Anxiety and Fear-Related Disorders grouping?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q8 Other Anxiety and Fear-Related Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 2. Are the symptoms better explained by another Mental and Behavioural Disorder (e.g., a psychotic, mood, or obsessive-compulsive and related disorder)?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q8 Other Anxiety and Fear-Related Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 3. Is the clinical presentation judged to be a Mental and Behavioural Disorder that shares primary clinical features with other Anxiety and Fear-Related Disorders (e.g., physiological symptoms of excessive arousal, apprehension, and avoidance behaviour)?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q8 Other Anxiety and Fear-Related Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 4. Are the symptoms developmentally appropriate? If so, a diagnosis should not be assigned.
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q8 Other Anxiety and Fear-Related Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 5. Are the symptoms in excess of what is normative for the individual’s specific cultural context?
Please answer the following questions regarding the diagnosis of Q8 Other Anxiety and Fear-Related Disorder for the person described in the vignette above. - 6. Do the symptoms cause significant distress or significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational or other important areas of functioning?
After answering these questions, do you still feel that [Field-P1_Dx1] is the most appropriate diagnosis for the person described in the vignette?
After reviewing the diagnostic guidelines for your initial selection of [Field-P1_Dx1], you decided that a different diagnosis would be more appropriate.  Which of the following diagnostic conclusions best corresponds to the person described in the vignette? - Selected Choice
After reviewing the diagnostic guidelines for your initial selection of [Field-P1_Dx1], you decided that a different diagnosis would be more appropriate.  Which of the following diagnostic conclusions best corresponds to the person described in the vignette? - A diagnosis from a different diagnostic area (please specify): - Text
Why did you decide to change your diagnostic conclusion? (Select all that apply.) - Selected Choice Lack of clarity in the vignette (please explain):
Why did you decide to change your diagnostic conclusion? (Select all that apply.) - Selected Choice Lack of clarity in the diagnostic guidelines (please explain):
Why did you decide to change your diagnostic conclusion? (Select all that apply.) - Selected Choice Other (please explain):
Why did you decide to change your diagnostic conclusion? (Select all that apply.) - Lack of clarity in the vignette (please explain): - Text
Why did you decide to change your diagnostic conclusion? (Select all that apply.) - Lack of clarity in the diagnostic guidelines (please explain): - Text
Why did you decide to change your diagnostic conclusion? (Select all that apply.) - Other (please explain): - Text
Please rate the level of impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational or other important areas of function experienced by the person described in the vignette:
Please rate the severity of the symptoms experienced by the person described in the vignette:
We are interested in understanding clinicians' thought processes about differential diagnosis.



What was your rationale for selecting [Field-P1_Final_Dx] instead of [Field-P1_Correct_Dx_is]?